## Papert’s constructionism theory {#papert-s-constructionism-theory}

Informed by both Piaget and Vygotsky, Seymour Papert (1928-2016), a founding faculty member of the [MIT Media Lab (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.](https://www.media.mit.edu/), developed one of the first educational programming languages known as [LOGO (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.](http://el.media.mit.edu/logo-foundation/what_is_logo/logo_programming.html) (Wheeler, 2012). Drawing from Piaget&#039;s constructivist view of development, Papert coined constructionism, a learning theory that emphasizes the agency of young people as active participants in constructing their learning.

According to Papert, learning happens through the act of making something within real world settings. To scaffold learning, the student should attempt to build an object or artifact such as a computer program, a robot, a story, or a music composition (MIT, 2015). This type of learning is often characterized as learner-centered, active, hands-on, or project-based (MIT, 2015). Examples of constructionism within library environments might include “makerspaces, robotics, 3D printing and other tools that can promote the making of objects” (Wheeler, 2012, p. “How it can be applied in education”).

“Randy”, a youth librarian at a _______library [INTS-014], describes how his library creates temporary makerspaces by partnering with a local business who brought the 3D printer equipment: They showed how to create graphics and the basics of designing graphics...We&#039;ve showed kids how to do paper crafts modeling, and how they use a lot of paper crafts modeling for the basis of their programming.”

Constructionism principles can also inform the design of learning environments. For instance, teachers or adults take on a facilitator role, and the learner makes decisions during the building or making process. Through self-directed learning, youth experiment with tools and relate them to their personal interests (Papert &amp; Harel, 1991). Technologies used in a constructionist approach, like [Lego Mindstorms](https://education.lego.com/en-us/middle-school/shop/products?gclid=Cj0KEQjwmcTJBRCYirao6oWPyMsBEiQA9hQPboKcMkN_KrvRpaYdsnS1_trkGgx4U2pmcwCIWt3b4t4aAmuL8P8HAQ), provide flexibility and openness, allowing learners to build and program a robot for themselves (Papert, 1980).

Papert’s constructionism approach has become highly influential in the field of Education and learning with technology. [Mitch Resnick](https://www.media.mit.edu/people/mres/overview/),MIT Media Lab professor and colleague of Papert, created the popular programming language, [Scratch](https://scratch.mit.edu/), based in part by LOGO and constructionist ideas. Papert’s work also led to the Computer Clubhouse project, a network of over 100 learning centers where youth from underserved communities learn to create and express themselves using emerging technologies. Computer Clubhouses emphasize active learning with technology along with Vygotskian approaches such as providing young people with mentors who support learning (Katie’s lecture, 2017).

With its emphasis on learning through making and creating, constructionism has also had an impact on the “maker movement”. Today, librarians across the country have used constructionism approaches in a library setting. “Janet”, a youth librarian at (INTK-001) library says she provides youth with access to technology and tools and tells them: “It&#039;s your job to experiment, it&#039;s your job to problem solve, your job to critically think. I&#039;m here to guide you.&quot;